# Intro to Rabbit MQ

- Add that bit about running docker for RabbitMQ but not seeing the queues showing up in the RabbitMQ Management portal.

## What is a message broker?

A message broker is software that enables applications, systems and services to communicate and exchange information—even if they were written in different languages or implemented on different platforms—by translating messages between formal messaging protocols. == IBM article

https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/message-brokers


## What is a message queue?

Message queues store “messages” or packets of data that applications create for other applications to use in the order they are transmitted until the consuming application can process them. This enables messages to wait safely until the receiving application is ready, so if there is a problem with the network or receiving application, the messages in the message queue are not lost.  == IBM article

This model is known as asynchronous messaging.

Asynchronous messaging refers to the type of inter-application communication that message brokers make possible.

Asynchronous messaging guarantees that messages will be delivered once (and once only) in the correct order relative to other messages.

## Importance of Message Brokers in System Design

https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/system-design/what-are-message-brokers-in-system-design/

See this artcile for examples 

## Examples

Talk about the tutorials on the RabbitMQ site that cover the AMQP 0-9-1 protocol.

AMQP 0-9-1 (Advanced Message Queuing Protocol) is a messaging protocol that enables conforming client applications to communicate with conforming messaging middleware brokers.

Messaging brokers receive messages from publishers (applications that publish them, also known as producers) and route them to consumers (applications that process them).

The AMQP 0-9-1 Model has the following view of the world: messages are published to exchanges, which are often compared to post offices or mailboxes. Exchanges then distribute message copies to queues using rules called bindings. Then the broker either delivers messages to consumers subscribed to queues, or consumers fetch/pull messages from queues on demand.

The examples require RabbitMQ to be installed or to run on a Container.

### Hello World
A simple setup consisting of two programs. One is the producer. The other is the consumer. Producer sends a message. The consumer receives the message(s) and prints them out. You can run the Prodcuer several times before running the Consumer. The Consumer will receive all the awaiting messages and print them out.

Introduced to these important concepts:
- A producer is a user application that sends messages.
- A queue is a buffer that stores messages.
- A consumer is a user application that receives messages.

### Work Queues

We create more than one consumer and see how RabbitMQ handles Round-robin dispatching by default.
Using manual message acknowledgments you can ensure that even if one of the consumers goes down (on our case we exit the running program) nothing is lost. The message is simply handed over to the other running consumer.
Learned how to make a queue durable. This means the queue will still exist if RabbitMQ quits or crashes.
How to mark messages as persistant.

Fair Dispatch => You might have noticed that the dispatching still doesn't work exactly as we want. For example in a situation with two workers, when all odd messages are heavy and even messages are light, one worker will be constantly busy and the other one will do hardly any work. Well, RabbitMQ doesn't know anything about that and will still dispatch messages evenly.
You can tell RabbitMQ not to dispatch a new message to a worker until it has processed and acknowledged the previous one. Instead, it will dispatch it to the next worker that is not still busy.

### Publish/Subscribe

The assumption behind a work queue is that each task is delivered to exactly one worker. When we deliver a message to multiple consumers we are using the pattern known as "publish/subscribe".

Exchanges:
The core idea in the messaging model in RabbitMQ is that the producer never sends any messages directly to a queue. Actually, quite often the producer doesn't even know if a message will be delivered to any queue at all.

Instead, the producer can only send messages to an exchange. An exchange is a very simple thing. On one side it receives messages from producers and the other side it pushes them to queues. The exchange must know exactly what to do with a message it receives. Should it be appended to a particular queue? Should it be appended to many queues? Or should it get discarded. The rules for that are defined by the exchange type.

There are a few exchange types available: direct, topic, headers and fanout. This tutorial focuses on fanout.

Learned about Temporary Queues.

That relationship between exchange and a queue is called a binding.

### Routing

A `fanout` exchange doesn't give much flexibility. It's only capable of mindless broadcasting.

Unlike a `direct` exchange. The routing algorithm behind a direct exchange is simple - a message goes to the queues whose binding key exactly matches the routing key of the message.

Learned about RoutingKeys and adding it as a binding between the exhange and a queue.

### Topics

Direct exchanges still have limitations, they can't do routing based on multiple criteria.

Messages sent to a topic exchange can't have an arbitrary routing_key - it must be a list of words, delimited by dots.

The words can be anything, but usually they specify some features connected to the message.
A few valid routing key examples: `stock.usd.nyse`, `nyse.vmw`, `quick.orange.rabbit`.

The logic behind the topic exchange is similar to a direct one - a message sent with a particular routing key will be delivered to all the queues that are bound with a matching binding key.

However there are two important special cases for binding keys:
- `*` (star) can substitute for exactly one word.
- `#` (hash) can substitute for zero or more words.

### RPC - Remote procedure call

What if we need to run a function on a remote computer and wait for the result? This pattern is commonly known as Remote Procedure Call or RPC.

A note on RPC: Although RPC is a pretty common pattern in computing, it's often criticised. The problems arise when a programmer is not aware whether a function call is local or if it's a slow RPC. Confusions like that result in an unpredictable system and adds unnecessary complexity to debugging. Instead of simplifying software, misused RPC can result in unmaintainable spaghetti code.

When in doubt avoid RPC. If you can, you should use an asynchronous pipeline - instead of RPC-like blocking, results are asynchronously pushed to a next computation stage.

Creating a callback queue for every RPC request is inefficient. A better way is creating a single callback queue per client.

## General notes

Note that the producer, consumer, and broker do not have to reside on the same host; indeed in most applications they don't. An application can be both a producer and consumer, too.

Declaring a queue is idempotent - it will only be created if it doesn't exist already. The message content is a byte array, so you can encode whatever you like there.

Streams for a different blog post.

## Try get some pics

