---
title: About
---

# About page

Hello and welcome to my blog! My name is Nick Gibbens.

We are constantly learning new things all the time. Some lessons are small while others feel like a life changing epiphany. Many of these lessons are forgotten as quickly as they are learned. I've always wanted a place where I could "persist" some of my learned lessons. 

That's where this blog comes into play. As a software developer I'm constantly picking up new things. Some are as small as a handy bit of syntax. Others are grappling a complex framework, system, new technology, etc. that take far longer to get a grasp of. I want this blog to be a place that I can document some of these lessons I've learned so that they hopefully remain ingrained a lot longer. There's the added benefit of potentially teaching something to someone else who may happen to stumble upon this blog.

I won't profess to be a coding wizard but I do know somethings. I also can't guarantee that I won't make mistakes in what I post but I will do my best. It's also through our mistakes that we learn our greatest lessons.

I plan for this blog to be akin to the Room of Requirement in Harry Potter. An amalgamation of all things programming and perhaps some things that stray out of this domain.

If you're interested in starting your own blog feel free to fork this Jekyll theme or take inspiration and create your own theme for your blog. 🌱

---

**Side note:** We live in the age of AI. Where "AI Slop" is surfacing on an exponential scale. As someone who uses LLMs on an almost daily basis I won't knock it. It's a tool that we should learn to use to benefit us and also have fun with. That being said, this blog is a place for my thoughts, not those generated by a computationally, powerful inanimate object that gives the illusion of "intelligence" (however well it may do so). It's inevitable I will post about and discuss AI. Should I share something generated by AI I will make note of such. That's my little disclaimer.