---
categories: [Opinion]
excerpt_separator: <!--end_excerpt-->
post_title: Garmin Strava Drama
tags: [Garmin, Strava]
---

I recently heard about some Garmin / Strava drama. As a user of both their software and a Garmin watch owner I read a little bit into it.

<!--end_excerpt-->

I am a fairly avid runner. I do several runs a week and have completed just under 10 marathons (including 3 ultra marathons). So, it goes without saying that I would make use of fitness software and fitness devices. Strava and Garmin are the main companies whose products and services I use. Therefore my interest was piqued when I heard there was some drama brewing between the two companies (Side note: I happened to hear about this from a friend while on a run. While running a lot of the conversation also tends to revolve around the world of running). It's rather a niche bit of drama. The majority of people who will be interested in the developments will be runners, cyclists, walkers, etc. who make use of these services and devices. I think both are impressive companies and hold a significant space in the fitness world. Despite using their products on a daily basis I'd never thought much about the legal affairs that take place behind the scenes.

## So, what's the issue?

I'll give a brief overview but also leave some links to articles that are more fleshed out. There are two issues happening simultaneously. Firstly Strava is suing Garmin for alleged patent infringement. The lawsuit alleges that Garmin has infringed on Strava's segments and heatmaps patents. Strava is seeking an injunction to prevent Garmin from selling any devices that offer these features. The second issue revolves around Garmin's updated policy that requires platforms that use data derived from their devices to give attribution for where this data came from. Strava didn't take this well and addressed the issue on a forum in Reddit. It did not go down well with the majority saying if the Strava-Garmin integration was severed they would stick with the device and merely make use of different fitness software.

[The Verge - Strava sues Garmin over alleged patent infringement](https://www.theverge.com/news/790922/strava-garmin-patent-infringement-lawsuit)  
[Cycling Weekly - Strava tells Garmin users not to worry amid legal dispute: 'Uninterrupted connectivity is our top priority'](https://www.cyclingweekly.com/news/strava-tells-garmin-users-not-to-worry-amid-legal-dispute-uninterrupted-connectivity-is-our-top-priority)  
[DC Rainmaker - Strava Just Sued Garmin: Demands Garmin Stop Selling Devices](https://www.dcrainmaker.com/2025/10/strava-sues-garmin-demands-stop-selling-devices.html)  
[Reddit - Setting the record straight about Garmin](https://www.reddit.com/r/Strava/comments/1nw8u98/setting_the_record_straight_about_garmin/)

## The symbiotic/rival nature of tech relationships

The two companies find themselves in a somewhat symbiotic yet somewhat rival relationship. Strava benefits from Garmin device users who want to use Strava's software to manage their fitness data. Garmin benefits from people involved in the fitness community through platforms such as Strava who may be encouraged to buy Garmin devices rather than log workouts on their smartphones. That's a very watered down explanation of this mutually beneficial relationship but it exists nonetheless. In the same breath they are also rivals as Garmin also provides pay-to-use software with similar features to that which Strava provides in their pay-to-use software. They have, for the most part, been able to operate together relatively well through their relationship. This flare up shines a spotlight on this once peaceful relationship which most users probably took for granted. It shows how a couple key decisions by either side can quickly cause cracks in these relationships.

## My thoughts

As a software developer I find this story very interesting yet it is a side of tech that I'm not exposed to nor think about that often. These types of (relatively) mutually beneficial relationships in the tech landscape often exist with little thought from the end users, myself included. But this fallout has made me think about the Garmin / Strava relationship quite a bit recently. I'm an end user of both these giants in the fitness tech landscape. I make use of a Garmin watch to record my runs. It wasn't my first fitness watch but I find it extremely reliable for my running needs. When my current watch eventually packs up and goes up to heaven in the cloud I'll most likely replace it with a new Garmin model. I also make use of Strava. I prefer their fitness software to the free version that Garmin provides for users of their devices. I think Strava have also nailed the social aspect of fitness. It's fun to view your friends workouts and see where they're running, cycling, etc. around the world. I've thought about who has more to lose in this relationship and I can't help but think it would be Strava. I think their software is great but Garmin does provide very similar services. Perhaps the user experience is not as great (at least in my opinion) but you can still get by with it. Plus they can always keep iterating it to bring about improvements. Garmin is a big player in wearables and fitness tracking devices. If Strava was to make the rash decision to not support Garmin integration anymore I think the majority of Garmin users who use Strava would be disappointed but ultimately carry on using their devices. Strava would be picking a hill to die on which could backfire on them. This drama also shows how Garmin has more leverage in the relationship. They will still sell their devices that allegedly infringe on Strava's patents because at the end of the day these patents are quite hard to confirm. Heatmaps and segments seem to have already existed before Strava patented their version of them. Strava is also going to capitulate and give attribution to Garmin sourced data. Probably because they know if they don't they could potentially lose access to all Garmin users and the massive revenue loss that would come with it.

I think this drama will ultimately end up being a storm in a teacup. It's been interesting to read about and follow. Especially as I make use of both companies products. I think Strava needs Garmin more than the other way round at the end of the day. I think the dispute will rather get handled out of the public view which it currently resides in. It's given me pause for thought about these tech relationships and how they often exist completely fine without the end users giving them too much thought. 