---
description: One day my smart bulb decided to stop working. Troubleshooting attempts failed. But I would not go gentle into that dumb night.
categories: [Opinion, Humour]
post_title: Rage Against the Dying of the (Smart) Light
---

A smart light bulb is a light bulb that went to private school. It's a nifty little invention that takes an ordinary (read 'dumb') light bulb and connects it to the internet. What isn't connected to the internet these days? With the power of the internet this light bulb can do many things that an ordinary one can't. It can be turned on from anywhere in the world using an app on a smartphone. Schedules for when it should turn on and off can be set up. Different brightnesses or colours can be set. Depending on the brand it might even come with "party modes" where it flashes different colours like you're in the club (I've found little use for that feature thus far if I'm honest). It's even more energy efficient than older light bulbs. You're saving the planet, well done.

I first decided to invest in a smart bulb when I was heading off for a holiday. My apartment would sit in darkness for two weeks. Strangers in the night might look up at my darkened windows and detect a pattern that no one is home. Paranoid perhaps but I grew up in a country where one, unfortunately, thinks about crime all too regularly. So, I did some research into how I could give the illusion that someone was coming and going in my apartment. This problem had already been solved thanks to the *electromechanical time switch* which allows you to program a schedule to control lights autonomously. But they are quite cumbersome and old school. Even saying electromechanical time switch is inefficient. That's when I remembered that such a thing as a smart bulb exists. I was late to the party but when I finally purchased one I was immediately sold on its brilliance. I could easily set up a schedule but it did one better. You can set an *Away mode* which is a period during which the smart bulb will randomly turn on and off. This gives an even better impression that someone is actually home (again, look past the paranoia).

I had more than a year's worth of enjoying the convenience this smart bulb added to my life. I seemed to wake up a little easier thanks to the bulb's light gently fading on at my desired rising time. I knew exactly when it was time for sleep thanks to it promptly fading off at my bedtime. I could count on there being a light on when I got home late in winter. It was very handy to schedule an Away mode when I would be away for a couple nights. Then one day it just stopped working. No forewarning. It had simply lost its ability to connect to my Wi-Fi. My attempts to interact with it via the app were in vain. Like a synapse that no longer fires in the brain, an invisible void had appeared between bulb and internet.

Devastated would be a strong word to describe how I felt about it but I was bummed out to say the least. I was sold on the convenience and usefulness of a smart bulb. I didn't want to go back to the days of using dumb light bulbs that actually required me to roll over and switch it on or off. What am I? A cretin?

Smart light bulbs cost more than normal light bulbs but an entry-level-one is perhaps a week's worth of coffees. It won't break the bank. Mine was only a little over a year old. I didn't want to replace it so soon into its lifespan. So, I set about troubleshooting what had gone wrong. I first attempted a *soft reset*. This simply resets the Wi-Fi connection only. You then re-pair the bulb to your Wi-Fi network and hopefully that is all that's required. I was able to work through most of the steps in the process. It could find my Wi-Fi network successfully. It could attempt to pair with it. The app displays a fun interface in the UI, where an animated image of a lamp gently pulses, while it attempts to complete the handshake between itself and the Wi-Fi network. But it would continually fail on this final hurdle. I then attempted a *hard reset* which resets the bulb to its factory settings. This essentially restores it to its state when you first pulled it out of the box. Much like the soft reset it would always hang on the final step and then fail with some generic message that it couldn't connect to the Wi-Fi and a link to a troubleshooting page (which displays basically all the steps I'd already previously done). The one suggestion that I didn't try was reconfiguring my Wi-Fi network. This felt excessive to me. All my other Wi-Fi-enabled devices were connecting just fine. I highly doubted it was the Wi-Fi network that was the issue.

After two days and several identical attempts, I gave up. I resigned myself to accepting that my one-year-old smart bulb had abruptly regressed to being a dumb bulb. The signs that it held a higher intelligence were always present when I switched it on. It would pulse three times, letting you know that it is ready to be connected to a Wi-Fi network. Mildly infuriating, I won't lie.

My sleeping pattern took a bit of a hit. I was finding it a bit harder to wake up in the mornings relying on an alarm, which I simply turned off and rolled back into bed. Gone was my artificial sunrise. I was going to bed later without the prompt darkness that used to descend automatically at bedtime. I planned to go purchase a new one the next time I planned on travelling. But I had one Hail Mary I would try before throwing up the white flag a final time. I remember reading on that troubleshooting page about bringing the smart bulb closer to the Wi-Fi router if it was struggling to connect. I had brushed this aside as it had never been an issue. The smart bulb sits in my bedroom while my router is in my living room-cum-study. At most, they're three metres away from each other with minimal wall in between. I plonked down the lamp a couple rulers worth of length away from the router. I followed the same steps I had attempted multiple times before, and... voilà! It connected without any problems. I then returned the lamp to its original dwelling and it's been fine ever since. I can't say if it was the proximity that was the issue or if it was some firmware update that temporarily tripped it up. Sometimes with tech things just lack a rhyme and reason despite it being a highly precise and structured field. Whatever the fix was I'm just grateful to return to modern times where I can turn on my light from the app on my phone that is lying a couple of centimetres from the light switch.

Like Dylan Thomas, I too raged against the dying of the light, albeit a smart one.